README.md, before:

# Monocular joint pose and forces estimation
### Context

Review of the CVPR 2019 paper [Estimating 3D Motion and Forces of Person-Object Interactions from Monocular Video](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/papers/Li_Estimating_3D_Motion_and_Forces_of_Person-Object_Interactions_From_Monocular_CVPR_2019_paper.pdf) 

- Program: [MVA Master's degree](https://www.master-mva.com/) class on [Robotics](https://scaron.info/robotics-mva/). ENS Paris-Saclay.
- Authors:
    - [Balthazar Neveu](https://github.com/balthazarneveu)
    - [Matthieu Dinot](https://github.com/mattx20)


# :clipboard: [Technical report](/report/report.pdf)

# :scroll: [Poster](/poster/poster_robotics_neveu_dinot.pdf)


![](/report/figures/method_illustration.png)





### Summary
#### Original paper's approach

| [Author's code](https://github.com/zongmianli/Estimating-3D-Motion-Forces) | [Original Paper](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/papers/Li_Estimating_3D_Motion_and_Forces_of_Person-Object_Interactions_From_Monocular_CVPR_2019_paper.pdf)  |
|:-------:|:-------:|
|![](/report/figures/method_overview_illustration.png) | The original paper estimates 3D poses and internal torques / external forces applied on a human interacting with a tool. The goal behind this paper is to collect the dynamics of human menial activities from standard videos (including educational tutorials) to later enable behavior cloning on real robots. |




|                                                                                                   Pipeline overview                                                                                                   | Inverse dynamics |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
| ![](/report/figures/authors_original_pipeline.png)  Multi-staged vision leads to human (2D & 3D) and object pose estimations aswell as contact prediction. | ![](/report/figures/inverse_dynamisc_equations.png) $q$ configuration states, $\tau$ muscle torques, $F$ external forces applied by the object (or ground) on the human, $\kappa$ denotes contact related constraints |


--------------
#### Our simplified setup

![](/report/figures/simplifications_logo.png)

For simplification reasons, we studied a much simple problem making the following assumptions
- :hammer::x: : no external objects or tools
- :muscle: a single arm, not the full body.
- :camera: the camera is assumed calibrated and standing on a tripod.


### Video pipeline : inverse kinematics
The current code is able to batch process videos and performs:
- 2D pose and 3D pose estimation using Mediapipe (off the shelf)
  - RGB video :arrow_right: 3D & 2D joint positions
- inverse kinematics from the 3D points
  - 3D points :arrow_right: arm configuration states (so called $q$)
- fits a camera pose in order to minimize 2d reprojection error
  - 2D points & 3D points from forward kinematics :arrow_right: Sequence of extrinsics matrices (just a 3D translation)

### Dynamics: simulations
We mostly did validate the inverse dynamics optimizer on simulations.

|Free fall | Free fall + friction|
|:-------:|:-------:|
|![](/report/figures/free_fall.gif) | ![](/report/figures/free_fall_friction.gif) |


#### Known limitations
There are still many missing points:
- We do not minimize the 2D reprojection error while performing Inverse Kinematics
- :muscle:  Many attempts have been made in order to reproduce the dynamics optimizer in order to recover the torques (shoulder and elbow). This is part of an extra notebook.


-----

## Setup
#### Setup projectyl
```bash
git clone git@github.com:balthazarneveu/monocular_pose_and_forces_estimation.git
cd monocular_pose_and_forces_estimation
pip install -e .
```

Download vision models
```bash
wget -O pose_landmarker.task -q https://storage.googleapis.com/mediapipe-models/pose_landmarker/pose_landmarker_heavy/float16/1/pose_landmarker_heavy.task
```


#### Processing videos
```bash
python scripts/batch_video_processing.py -i "data/*.mp4" -o __out -A demo
```
- `-i` regex or list of videos
- `-o` output folder (*automatically created if not present*)
- `--resize`: resize ratio
- `-A` to pick up an algo
  - `-A view`  will simply lanch a frame by frame viewer with zoom-in capabilities
  - `-A pose` will run mediapipe pose estimator. (run once, store the results, next time reload)
  - `-A ik` will run inverse kinematics frame by frame (but keep previous frame as an initlization)
  - `-A fit_cam` will perform camera pose estimation.
- `-smoothness` allows to modify the smoothness used when fitting camera pose
- `-calib` points to the geometric calibration file, in case you're using a different camera.
> `--override` can be used to recompute images and overwrite previous results.




### Demo
![](/report/figures/arm_demo.png)

------

## Modelization
|                Pose estimation                 |                 Arm model                  |
| :--------------------------------------------: | :----------------------------------------: |
| ![](/report/figures/pose_estimation_gui_2.png) | ![](/report/figures/live_arm_vertical.png) |
| :statue_of_liberty:  pose estimated from video |    :wrench: Synchronized "Digital twin"    |


Color code:
- joints:
  - :red_circle: shoulder
  - :green_circle: elbow
  - :large_blue_circle: wrist 
- limbs:
  - :green_square: upper-arm 
  - :blue_square: forearm

### Pose estimation
Using [Google Mediapipe](https://developers.google.com/mediapipe/solutions/vision/pose_landmarker), we're able to retrieve
- 2D projected points
- 3D coarse estimation


### Coarse initialization of dynamic system inverse kinematics
Based on a frame by frame estimation (initalized from previous estimation), we're able to retrieve a decent state arm.

:warning: As mediapipe does not provide 3D coordinates that grant fixed lenght arms, the system can't always be resolved correctly.

:bulb: An idea is to force the initialization of the inverse kinematics by forcing standardized length of the arms.

![](/report/figures/estimated_poses_from_ik.png)



### Projective camera geometry
- Pinhole model is used

|                                   Camera                                    |                          World                           |
| :-------------------------------------------------------------------------: | :------------------------------------------------------: |
|                ![](/report/figures/camera_referentials.png)                 | ![](/report/figures/world_camera_referentials_small.png) |
| OpenCV [convention](https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/d9/d0c/group__calib3d.html) |                   Pinocchio convention                   |

- [test_camera_projection.py](/test/test_camera_projection.py) has a numerical example showing how you project a 3D point in the pinocchio referential onto the sensor.
  - The top of the Eiffel Tower located $Z=324m$ above the ground (*$Z$  world coordinates*)
  - is at a distance $Y=6km$ away from the camera (*$Y$ in world coordinates*)
  - Camera is a Canon 5D MarkIII 24Mpix ($h=4000$, $w=6000$) camera 
  - The full frame sensor (24mm x 36mm) has a $\mu=6\text{µm}$ pixel pitch.
  - $f_{\text{pix}} = \frac{f=\text{focal length}}{\mu=\text{pixel pitch}}$
  - $y - \frac{h}{2}= \frac{Z.f}{Y} \approx \frac{-324*8333}{6000} \approx{-450pixels}$


--------

### Projecting the arm into the camera plane

![](/report/figures/simplification_overview.png)

|                     Camera                     |               World                |
| :--------------------------------------------: | :--------------------------------: |
| ![](/report/figures/arm_camera_projection.png) | ![](/report/figures/arm_world.png) |



#### Camera calibration
From a video, shoot a 7x10 checkerboard in multiple orientations.
Use the [Zhang method](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/tr98-71.pdf)
```bash
python scripts/batch_video_processing.py -i "data/*cam*calib*.mp4" -o calibration -A camera_calibration
```
![camera_calibration](/report/figures/camera_calibration.gif)


-----
#### Camera pose optimization
A least-square optimizer is used in order to estimate the camera translation with regard to the shoulder.
We ensure smoothness on camera/shoulder translation.


$min_{t_{\text{camera}}}||K [Q_{\text{camera}}, T_{\text{camera}}]. \vec{P^{\textrm{3D}}} - \vec{p^{\textrm{2D}}}||^2 + ||\frac{\Delta T_{\text{camera}}}{\Delta{t}}||^2$

In our simplified model, since the shoulder can fully rotated, we freeze camera the rotation $Q_{\text{camera}}=I_{3}$ and only optimize on translation.

Average 2D reprojection error on the whole sequence is in the order of 20 pixels on a FullHD video.
It is no totally unexpected to have such an error:
- As a matter of fact, when we standardize the arm length, we introduce an extra reprojection error in the 3D points.
- Then the arm state has been estimated to fit these 3D points simply using inverse kinematics. The IK solution does not minimize the 2D reprojection error in the current solution.
- To be fast for the demo, we compute the optimizer solution for each sliding windows of 30 frames. The optimization over the whole sequence takes quite a while (roughly 1 minute for a 1 minute video). 

![](/report/figures/camera_pose_fitting_first_100_frames.png)



-----

## :gift: Extra

Initially, we had plans to measure groundtruth velocity by retrieving the trajectory of a ball thrown by the hand.
- We did a few experiments with SAM [Segment anything](https://segment-anything.com/) which is wrapped in the library to select the ball.
- We also have a CERES C++ ultra basic optimizer to fit the parabola of a ball in free fall.

### CERES setup
```bash
git clone https://ceres-solver.googlesource.com/ceres-solver
cd ceres-solver
mkdir ceres-bin
cd ceres-bin
cmake ../../ceres-solver -DCMAKE_CUDA_ARCHITECTURES=native -DCMAKE_CUDA_COMPILER=/usr/local/cuda/bin/nvcc
make -j3
make install
```

Commit message:

link the fork to the pytorch open pose with batch processing

README.md, after:

# Monocular joint pose and forces estimation
### Context

Review of the CVPR 2019 paper [Estimating 3D Motion and Forces of Person-Object Interactions from Monocular Video](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/papers/Li_Estimating_3D_Motion_and_Forces_of_Person-Object_Interactions_From_Monocular_CVPR_2019_paper.pdf) 

- Program: [MVA Master's degree](https://www.master-mva.com/) class on [Robotics](https://scaron.info/robotics-mva/). ENS Paris-Saclay.
- Authors:
    - [Balthazar Neveu](https://github.com/balthazarneveu)
    - [Matthieu Dinot](https://github.com/mattx20)


# :clipboard: [Technical report](/report/report.pdf)

# :scroll: [Poster](/poster/poster_robotics_neveu_dinot.pdf)


![](/report/figures/method_illustration.png)





### Summary
#### Original paper's approach

| [Author's code](https://github.com/zongmianli/Estimating-3D-Motion-Forces) | [Original Paper](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/papers/Li_Estimating_3D_Motion_and_Forces_of_Person-Object_Interactions_From_Monocular_CVPR_2019_paper.pdf)  |
|:-------:|:-------:|
|![](/report/figures/method_overview_illustration.png) | The original paper estimates 3D poses and internal torques / external forces applied on a human interacting with a tool. The goal behind this paper is to collect the dynamics of human menial activities from standard videos (including educational tutorials) to later enable behavior cloning on real robots. |




|                                                                                                   Pipeline overview                                                                                                   | Inverse dynamics |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
| ![](/report/figures/authors_original_pipeline.png)  Multi-staged vision leads to human (2D & 3D) and object pose estimations aswell as contact prediction. | ![](/report/figures/inverse_dynamisc_equations.png) $q$ configuration states, $\tau$ muscle torques, $F$ external forces applied by the object (or ground) on the human, $\kappa$ denotes contact related constraints |


--------------
#### Our simplified setup

![](/report/figures/simplifications_logo.png)

For simplification reasons, we studied a much simple problem making the following assumptions
- :hammer::x: : no external objects or tools
- :muscle: a single arm, not the full body.
- :camera: the camera is assumed calibrated and standing on a tripod.


### Video pipeline : inverse kinematics
The current code is able to batch process videos and performs:
- 2D pose and 3D pose estimation using Mediapipe (off the shelf)
  - RGB video :arrow_right: 3D & 2D joint positions
- inverse kinematics from the 3D points
  - 3D points :arrow_right: arm configuration states (so called $q$)
- fits a camera pose in order to minimize 2d reprojection error
  - 2D points & 3D points from forward kinematics :arrow_right: Sequence of extrinsics matrices (just a 3D translation)

### Dynamics: simulations
We mostly did validate the inverse dynamics optimizer on simulations.

|Free fall | Free fall + friction|
|:-------:|:-------:|
|![](/report/figures/free_fall.gif) | ![](/report/figures/free_fall_friction.gif) |


#### Known limitations
There are still many missing points:
- We do not minimize the 2D reprojection error while performing Inverse Kinematics
- :muscle:  Many attempts have been made in order to reproduce the dynamics optimizer in order to recover the torques (shoulder and elbow). This is part of an extra notebook.


-----

## Setup
#### Setup projectyl
```bash
git clone git@github.com:balthazarneveu/monocular_pose_and_forces_estimation.git
cd monocular_pose_and_forces_estimation
pip install -e .
```

Download vision models
```bash
wget -O pose_landmarker.task -q https://storage.googleapis.com/mediapipe-models/pose_landmarker/pose_landmarker_heavy/float16/1/pose_landmarker_heavy.task
```


#### Processing videos
```bash
python scripts/batch_video_processing.py -i "data/*.mp4" -o __out -A demo
```
- `-i` regex or list of videos
- `-o` output folder (*automatically created if not present*)
- `--resize`: resize ratio
- `-A` to pick up an algo
  - `-A view`  will simply lanch a frame by frame viewer with zoom-in capabilities
  - `-A pose` will run mediapipe pose estimator. (run once, store the results, next time reload)
  - `-A ik` will run inverse kinematics frame by frame (but keep previous frame as an initlization)
  - `-A fit_cam` will perform camera pose estimation.
- `-smoothness` allows to modify the smoothness used when fitting camera pose
- `-calib` points to the geometric calibration file, in case you're using a different camera.
> `--override` can be used to recompute images and overwrite previous results.




### Demo
![](/report/figures/arm_demo.png)

------

## Modelization
|                Pose estimation                 |                 Arm model                  |
| :--------------------------------------------: | :----------------------------------------: |
| ![](/report/figures/pose_estimation_gui_2.png) | ![](/report/figures/live_arm_vertical.png) |
| :statue_of_liberty:  pose estimated from video |    :wrench: Synchronized "Digital twin"    |


Color code:
- joints:
  - :red_circle: shoulder
  - :green_circle: elbow
  - :large_blue_circle: wrist 
- limbs:
  - :green_square: upper-arm 
  - :blue_square: forearm

### Pose estimation
Using [Google Mediapipe](https://developers.google.com/mediapipe/solutions/vision/pose_landmarker), we're able to retrieve
- 2D projected points
- 3D coarse estimation


### Coarse initialization of dynamic system inverse kinematics
Based on a frame by frame estimation (initalized from previous estimation), we're able to retrieve a decent state arm.

:warning: As mediapipe does not provide 3D coordinates that grant fixed lenght arms, the system can't always be resolved correctly.

:bulb: An idea is to force the initialization of the inverse kinematics by forcing standardized length of the arms.

![](/report/figures/estimated_poses_from_ik.png)



### Projective camera geometry
- Pinhole model is used

|                                   Camera                                    |                          World                           |
| :-------------------------------------------------------------------------: | :------------------------------------------------------: |
|                ![](/report/figures/camera_referentials.png)                 | ![](/report/figures/world_camera_referentials_small.png) |
| OpenCV [convention](https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/d9/d0c/group__calib3d.html) |                   Pinocchio convention                   |

- [test_camera_projection.py](/test/test_camera_projection.py) has a numerical example showing how you project a 3D point in the pinocchio referential onto the sensor.
  - The top of the Eiffel Tower located $Z=324m$ above the ground (*$Z$  world coordinates*)
  - is at a distance $Y=6km$ away from the camera (*$Y$ in world coordinates*)
  - Camera is a Canon 5D MarkIII 24Mpix ($h=4000$, $w=6000$) camera 
  - The full frame sensor (24mm x 36mm) has a $\mu=6\text{µm}$ pixel pitch.
  - $f_{\text{pix}} = \frac{f=\text{focal length}}{\mu=\text{pixel pitch}}$
  - $y - \frac{h}{2}= \frac{Z.f}{Y} \approx \frac{-324*8333}{6000} \approx{-450pixels}$


--------

### Projecting the arm into the camera plane

![](/report/figures/simplification_overview.png)

|                     Camera                     |               World                |
| :--------------------------------------------: | :--------------------------------: |
| ![](/report/figures/arm_camera_projection.png) | ![](/report/figures/arm_world.png) |



#### Camera calibration
From a video, shoot a 7x10 checkerboard in multiple orientations.
Use the [Zhang method](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/tr98-71.pdf)
```bash
python scripts/batch_video_processing.py -i "data/*cam*calib*.mp4" -o calibration -A camera_calibration
```
![camera_calibration](/report/figures/camera_calibration.gif)


-----
#### Camera pose optimization
A least-square optimizer is used in order to estimate the camera translation with regard to the shoulder.
We ensure smoothness on camera/shoulder translation.


$min_{t_{\text{camera}}}||K [Q_{\text{camera}}, T_{\text{camera}}]. \vec{P^{\textrm{3D}}} - \vec{p^{\textrm{2D}}}||^2 + ||\frac{\Delta T_{\text{camera}}}{\Delta{t}}||^2$

In our simplified model, since the shoulder can fully rotated, we freeze camera the rotation $Q_{\text{camera}}=I_{3}$ and only optimize on translation.

Average 2D reprojection error on the whole sequence is in the order of 20 pixels on a FullHD video.
It is no totally unexpected to have such an error:
- As a matter of fact, when we standardize the arm length, we introduce an extra reprojection error in the 3D points.
- Then the arm state has been estimated to fit these 3D points simply using inverse kinematics. The IK solution does not minimize the 2D reprojection error in the current solution.
- To be fast for the demo, we compute the optimizer solution for each sliding windows of 30 frames. The optimization over the whole sequence takes quite a while (roughly 1 minute for a 1 minute video). 

![](/report/figures/camera_pose_fitting_first_100_frames.png)



-----

## :gift: Extra

In case you'd like to dig in the original author's implementation, we provide a functional fork of [Pytorch OpenPose](https://github.com/MattX20/pytorch-openpose) which allows batch processing on videos.


Initially, we had plans to measure groundtruth velocity by retrieving the trajectory of a ball thrown by the hand.

- We did a few experiments with SAM [Segment anything](https://segment-anything.com/) which is wrapped in the library to select the ball.
- We also have a CERES C++ ultra basic optimizer to fit the parabola of a ball in free fall.


### CERES setup
```bash
git clone https://ceres-solver.googlesource.com/ceres-solver
cd ceres-solver
mkdir ceres-bin
cd ceres-bin
cmake ../../ceres-solver -DCMAKE_CUDA_ARCHITECTURES=native -DCMAKE_CUDA_COMPILER=/usr/local/cuda/bin/nvcc
make -j3
make install
```
